---
layout: post
title: Neural Basis of Rhythmic Behaviour
date: 2024-11-02
description: Central oscillator and the debate of our nature
tags: neural-circuits
categories: journal-club
---

This is a story about an `oscillator`,  or a neural pattern generator, which is a network of interneurons that produces cyclic outputs, driving motor neurons to generate patterned, continuous movement.

The concept of a central pattern generator (CPG) arose from a debate on the arthropod wing system published in the *Journal of Experimental Biology* (*The Central Nervous Control of Flight in A Locust.* Wilson, 1961). Wilson's semi-isolation experiments showed that proprioceptive reflexes are not necessary for the patterned activity in the thoracic ganglia that likely drives the up-and-down motion of the two wing pairs in desert locusts. This challenged his professor Weis-Fogh's hypothesis of a reflex-driven origin for insect flight.

Later in a 1980 commentary *Are central pattern generators understandable?*, [Dr. Fred Delcomyn](https://www.life.illinois.edu/delcomyn/), a neurophysiologist using insect locomotion as a model behaviour, pointed that the chief challenge in understanding central pattern generators lies not in identifying the functions of individual interneurons within a large neuron population, but in addressing two fundamental questions: 
1. Can we comprehend an "emergent" property in elemental terms? 
2. How can we prove that we fully understand a network's function?

>Even if we map every neuron and their synaptic interconnections, it may still be impossible to rigorously understand how the network performs its functions.

With this statement, he expressed the concern that basic functions of the nervous system may not be unapproachable at the level of single cells, similar to how we cannot explain the purpose of a chess game solely by examining the operation of individual chess pieces.

I have no intention of expressing my opinion on the purpose of the ensemble of elements; instead, I would like to share this objective review by Dr. Delcomyn on the neural basis of rhythmic behavior.

<hr>

#### Citation
Delcomyn, F. (1980). Neural basis of rhythmic behaviour in animals. Science, 210(4469), 492-498. [DOI: 10.1126/science.7423199](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.7423199)

#### Introduction
**General research question**: Is there a general principle of integration governing the neural basis of locomotion across diverse species, from invertebrates to vertebrates?

**Hypothesis**: Rhythmic behaviour in locomotion is regulated by intrinsic activities of a central pattern generator, rather than sensory feedback from moving body parts.

- `General principles` across species are less established at the multicellular level.

- `Rhythmic behaviour` refers to a movement pattern generated by coordinated, repetitive alternation of all or part of an animal's body, facilitating efficient and sustained motion.

- Two hypotheses about the neural basis of rhythmic behaviour: 

  `Peripheral Control`: Local sensory feedback loops regulate the switching of movements.

  `Central Control`: A central pattern generator ("neural oscillator"), either a single "pacemaker neuron" or a population of neurons, produces intrinsic activity to activate muscles.

#### Methods
- `Isolation experiments`:

  **Rationale**: Isolate all or part of the nervous system and record its activity to determine if motor neurons maintain rhythmic bursts when removed from all possible sources of sensory feedback.

  **Potential Sources of Error**:

  1. Difficulty characterizing behaviour during muscle output recording.

      **Solution**: Record muscle output from minimally dissected animals and compare with isolated neurons. Minimal dissection refers to the least surgical intervention to record muscle activity while allowing the animal to engage in natural behaviour.

  2. Activity resulting from injury or unremoved sensory input.

      **Solution**: Use randomized instead of timed stimuli to prevent generating rhythmic patterns by stimulation from sensory neurons.

- `Deafferentation experiments`:

  **Rationale**: Sever some sensory nerves and observe motor patterns, demonstrating that loss of sensory feedback does not affect rhythmic activity in motor neurons or muscle output.

  **Potential Sources of Error**: 
  
    Rhythmic activity may be driven by sensory stimuli from small, undetected neural connections or from undisturbed body parts unrelated to movement.

    **Solution**: Expand the deafferented body range and utilize the physical structure of model organisms. For example, Von Holst deafferented 1/3 body of a fish and demonstrated that coordination of the head and tail is affected to provide evidence for central control. This approach capitalizes on the fish's tube-like morphology.

    > "posture-movement problem" (Von Holst & Mittelstaedt 1950): How does body perform intentional movements without triggering automatic neuromuscular resistance meant to stabilize posture? This paradox highlights a core issue in motor control: How the brain and body coordinate to allow intentional movement while preserving stability.

- `Paralysis experiments`:

  **Rationale**: Use a paralytic agent with no muscle contractions or movement of body parts, removing the patterned sensory input associated with movement while observing if motor neuron activity patterns persist.

  **Potential Sources of Error**: 

  If paralysis is pharmacologically induced, the drugs may have side effects on the brain and other components of the neuromuscular system, such as the spindle stretch receptors in small muscle fibers.
  
#### Future Directions
- Nature of Oscillators:

  1. What are the connections in the interneuron network? e.g. What are the wiring of excitatory and inhibitory synapses? What are the composition of synaptic morphology, including chemical synapses and gap junctions?
  2. What are the electrical properties of neurons? e.g. How rhythmic bursting arises from the dynamics of ion channels?

- Interaction of Oscillators: How do multiple oscillatory networks connect to coordinate different body parts? Is a popupation of interneurons shared between different CPGs?

- Integration of Sensory Input: How sensory input adjust oscillatory frequency and amplitude?

